---
layout: post
title: Trip Report - LC3 China 2018, Beijing
subtitle: 2/3 report, to be exact :)
tags: [LC3]
---

LC3 China 2018 took place from 25th June to 27th June at the China
National Convention Center in Beijing. This is the second time that the
LC3 was held in China, but although it's very hot in China at that time
of the year, still more than 3,000 attendants joined the conference!
I attended the first two days, and had a wonderful time at this
important and big conference.

The LC3 had a large showcase area from various companies. IBM was
present with both HyperLedger and LinuxONE. The big sponsor, Huawei,
attracted many attendants with their Cloud and IoT solutions. SUSE
vigorously promoted their container as a service solution. Microsoft
emphasized their commitments to open source. Small startup companies
like CaiCloud showed their container management products.

The talks covered a wide range of topics, including Linux, containers,
cloud technologies and more in addition to gaining insight into how to
navigate and lead in the open source community.

A few areas of heightened interest stood out:
* Keynote: Unleash the Power of Open Source,
  by Evan Xiao, Vice President, Strategy & Industry Development, Huawei.
* Keynote: Managing Open Source in Tencent, from the Bottom Up,
  by Liu Xin, General Manager of Mobile Internet Group, Tencent.
* Three-Hot Technologies and Their Usages at Huawei's Public Cloud,
  by Liu Jinsong & Huang Zhichao, Huawei.
* [Shared Virtual Addressing](https://schd.ws/hosted_files/lc32018/e0/LinuxCon18_Share_Virtual_Address.pdf),
  by Yisheng Xie & Bob Liu & Zefan Li, Huawei.
* [VFIO Device Assignment Quirks and How to Avoid Them in Your Hardware](https://schd.ws/hosted_files/lc32018/4b/lc32018-Williamson-VFIO-Quirks.pdf),
  by Alex Williamson, Red Hat.
* [Using Docker in QEMU Testing](https://schd.ws/hosted_files/lc32018/44/Using%20Docker%20in%20QEMU%20Testing.pdf),
  by Fam Zheng, Red Hat.
* Qemu cache in virtio blk layer, by Nian Qing, Alibaba.
* Automation to make oss license compliance easier,
  by Kate Stewart & Greg Kroah Hartman, Linux Foundation.

Fam and Alex delivered solid topics in the virtualization area, while
what Huawei has done with open source practice is really really
impressive.

**Other benifits:**

It's a good time to meet old friends from SUSE, Intel and Array
Networks. And it's also a perfect chance for making new friends. :)
