---
layout: post
title: Wrap-up for Channel I/O pass-through
subtitle: a.k.a vfio-ccw
tags: [vfio-ccw]
---

I've been working on Channel I/O pass-through on KVM on Z for the past
three years. Since it comes to the end of this career, it's the right
time to have a wrap-up here.

I have to admit that s390 and Channel I/O is not popular beyond the
Mainframers, so it's somewhat hard to attract attendtion and interest
from the other people. But there are really a lot of fun to play with
them.

# Background

Different than other hardware architectures, s390 has defined a
unified I/O access method, which is so called Channel I/O. It has its
own access patterns, which is a quite different mechanism comparing to
the normally seen PCI stuff.

Motivation for vfio-ccw is to passthrough subchannels to a virtual
machine, while vfio is the means.

Typically, a guest virtualized via QEMU/KVM on s390 only sees
paravirtualized virtio devices via the "Virtio Over Channel I/O
(virtio-ccw)" transport. This makes virtio devices discoverable via
standard operating system algorithms for handling channel devices.

However this is not enough. On s390 for the majority of devices, which
use the standard Channel I/O based mechanism, we also need to provide
the functionality of passing through them to a QEMU virtual machine.
This includes devices that don't have a virtio counterpart (e.g. tape
drives) or that have specific characteristics which guests want to
exploit.

For passing a device to a guest, we want to use the same interface as
everybody else, namely vfio. We implement this vfio support for channel
devices via the vfio mediated device framework and the subchannel device
driver "vfio_ccw".

Below is a high Level block diagram.

~~~
 +-------------+
 |             |
 | +---------+ | mdev_register_driver() +--------------+
 | |  Mdev   | +<-----------------------+              |
 | |  bus    | |                        | vfio_mdev.ko |
 | | driver  | +----------------------->+              |<-> VFIO user
 | +---------+ |    probe()/remove()    +--------------+    APIs
 |             |
 |  MDEV CORE  |
 |   MODULE    |
 |   mdev.ko   |
 | +---------+ | mdev_register_device() +--------------+
 | |Physical | +<-----------------------+              |
 | | device  | |                        |  vfio_ccw.ko |<-> subchannel
 | |interface| +----------------------->+              |     device
 | +---------+ |       callback         +--------------+
 +-------------+
~~~

# Status

Support for vfio-ccw has been included in Linux and QEMU [for some
time](https://virtualpenguins.blogspot.de/2017/06/linux-412-and-qemu-210-will-have-basic.html),
while support in Libvirt was just accpeted recently.

Plans for future could be found here:
[A vfio-ccw primer](https://virtualpenguins.blogspot.com/2018/05/a-vfio-ccw-primer.html).

There are limitations for the current implementation, which are
documented in materials listed in the following **Reference**
sections. But for a Linux guest user who uses basic read/write
functions with ECKD DASD devices (the target device for now), you
should not worry about them.

# Usage

Recent QEMU and Linux versions has everything you need in the host.
You'd need to follow the following instructions to prepare a ECKD
device and pass-through it to a Linux guest.
See [this wiki entry](https://wiki.qemu.org/Features/Channel_I/O_Passthrough)
for details.

* Kernel Configuration

~~~
CONFIG_S390_CCW_IOMMU=y
CONFIG_VFIO=m
CONFIG_VFIO_MDEV=m
CONFIG_VFIO_MDEV_DEVICE=m
CONFIG_VFIO_CCW=m
~~~

* Modules Required

~~~
modprobe vfio.ko
modprobe mdev.ko
modprobe vfio_mdev.ko
modprobe vfio_iommu_type1.ko
modprobe vfio_ccw.ko
~~~

* You need to have a DASD/ECKD device as the target device.

Find the subchannel (0."$ssid"."$schid") of your target DASD/ECKD
device and bind the subchannel to the vfio_ccw driver.

{% highlight bash linenos %}
#find the DASD you can use with lsdasd on your host, e.g.:
#devno="7e52"
#schid="16ca"
#ssid="0"
#for device 0.0.7e52 on subchannel 0.0.16ca.
#unbind the CCW device from its subchannel
echo 0."$ssid"."$devno" > /sys/bus/ccw/devices/0."$ssid"."$devno"/driver/unbind
#unbind the subchannel from the I/O subchannel driver
echo 0."$ssid"."$schid" > /sys/bus/css/devices/0."$ssid"."$schid"/driver/unbind
#bind the subchannel to the vfio_ccw driver
echo 0."$ssid"."$schid" > /sys/bus/css/drivers/vfio_ccw/bind
{% endhighlight %}

* Create a Mediated Device for the physical device

{% highlight bash linenos %}
    #generate a uuid with uuidgen. e.g.:
    #uuid="6dfd3ec5-e8b3-4e18-a6fe-57bc9eceb920"
    echo "$uuid" > /sys/bus/css/devices/0."$ssid"."$schid"/mdev_supported_types/vfio_ccw-io/create
{% endhighlight %}

For Libvirt user, the following guest domain XML configuration format
is provided:

{% highlight xml linenos %}
     <devices>
       <hostdev mode='subsystem' type='mdev' model='vfio-ccw'>
         <source>
           <address uuid='90c6c135-ad44-41d0-b1b7-bae47de48627'/>
         </source>
         <address type='ccw' cssid='0xfe' ssid='0x0' devno='0x0001'/>
       </hostdev>
       <hostdev mode='subsystem' type='mdev' model='vfio-ccw'>
         <source>
           <address uuid='25a233f5-278f-4c27-9203-ec854862f8fd'/>
         </source>
       </hostdev>
     </devices>
{% endhighlight %}

{: .box-note}
**Note:** You should always use **0xfe** for **cssid**, otherwise you
  will not see your device since MCSS-E is not supported on Linux on Z
  for now.

# Reference

Here are some good materials for reference:

* ESA/s390 Principles of Operation manual (IBM Form. No. SA22-7832)
* ESA/390 Common I/O Device Commands manual (IBM Form. No. SA22-7204)
* [wikipedia entry](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Channel_I/O):
  Channel I/O
* [vfio-ccw.txt](https://github.com/torvalds/linux/blob/master/Documentation/s390/vfio-ccw.txt):
  Linux Kernel Documentation
* [Features/Channel I/O Passthrough](https://wiki.qemu.org/Features/Channel_I/O_Passthrough):
  QEMU Wiki
* [virtualpenguins](https://virtualpenguins.blogspot.com/):
  Cornelia Huck's blog, which offers very good knowledge series for
  s390 related stuff.
* [VFIO based Channel IO pass-through for IBM z](https://github.com/leonsvic/CLK/blob/master/CLK2016/Day2_102_2_VFIO based Channel IO pass-through for IBM z Systems_ShiDongjia.pdf):
  My presentation on CLK2016

# Closing

**Acknowledgement:**
* Cornelia Huck
* Pierre Morel
* Halil Pasic
* Xiao Feng Ren
* Boris Fiuczynsk
* Shalini Chellatathurai

It's a great journey to work together with many talented people to
make this happen. I learnt a lot from those guys along the way. Wish
everybody a great future, and
> So Long, and Thanks for All the Fish.
